This lecture is about
reading data from HDF5.
HDF5 is used for storing large data sets.
It's also used for
storing structured data sets, and
it supports storing a range of datatypes.
The name HDF stands for hierarchical data
format and that's because the data is
stored in groups which contains zero or
more data sets, along with their metadata.
Each of these groups has a group header,
with the group name, and
a list of attributes
corresponding to that group.
They also have a group symbol table which
has a list of the objects in the group.
Datasets are then multidimensional
arrays of elements along with metadata.
They can have a header with name,
datatype, dataspace, storage layout.
And then they also have a data array,
which is actually sort of a data frame you
can think about it of the HDF5 element.
If you wanna know more about the HDF5
storage structure you can go
to the HDF5 group's website.
The R HDF5 package is actually
installed through bioconductor.
So the way that we're going to install
the package is we're going to source this
URL right here, and
that will load the biocLite function.
The first time you install a package with
biocLite, you will also have to install
the bio base packages from Bioconductor
and so it might take a little bit.
And so what we're gonna do is use
the biocLite command to load the R HDF5
package.
Then once we've downloaded the package,
we can just load it with the same
library command that we always use.
In this lecture we're gonna
actually create HDF5 files, and
then interact with them.
You can actually just use the R HDF5
file package to access data.
And pull it out of HDF5 data sets without
having to create them yourself, but
it's sort of easier in terms of lecturing
just to show you what it looks like when
we create them ourselves.
So we're gonna use the h5createFile
command to create HDF5 file set,
which is gonna be, example.h5.
So this lecture's gonna be
modeled very closely on
the RHDF5 tutorial which can
be found at this website here,
that I've linked to at
the very bottom of this slide.
So, once we've created that HDF5 file,
then what we can do is we can
create groups within the file.
So we use h5createGroup.
And so what that will do is it'll
create within this file, the group foo.
And then we can create
another group called baa.
And create another group That is
a sub group of a group called foobaa.
And so what you can do then,
is you can actually see the groups and
the names of the files that we've created.
If you look at h5ls, so
it's like the ls command but
it's listing out only the components
of this particular hef5 file.
So then what we can do is
write to the specific groups.
So for example, we can create a matrix A,
and then we can use the h5write
command to write that matrix
to a particular group.
So again this is the file that
we're looking at and then this
is the group within that file, and so
we don't have to write just matrices.
We can actually write
multidimensional arrays.
For example,
here's a multidimensional array.
We can actually add attributes.
So for example,
we can give it metadata like this,
the leader attribute,
which is sort of about the units.
And then we can again use
the h5write command to write this
array to a particular subgroup.
And so again if we list out
what's going on inside this
file now we have all
the groups that we've created.
And also within those groups we
actually have some datasets.
So you can see that
A is now an H5 dataset.
And it consists of integers.
And then there is another dataset down
here, B, which consists of floats.
And it give you the dimensions of those
datasets that can be multidimensional.
so we can write a data set directly.
Also, we can write it actually a data set
to the top level group and the way that we
do that is suppose we create a dataframe
like this, with the df command.
So now we have this data frame up here.
And so what we can do is we can actually
use the h5write command to write that.
Data frame directly to
the top level group.
So instead of passing it the group
that we're gonna send it to we
can actually just send
it the variable name.
So then if we list out what's going on
we now see that in the top level group,
sort of the root group,
you see df and it's a dataset.
And it gives you the dimensions
of the dataset and so forth.
You can then read your written
data using the h5read command.
So you're gonna use h5read,
you're gonna tell it what file
you're gonna be looking in, and then for
example you can tell it to read a very
specific data set like this
where you can do slash A.
You can read sub data sets by just
specifying the pack like this.
You can also read a data
set in the top level group
by just specifying the data set name.
And so, what you get back out
is the data that you wrote in.
This is how you are going to read data if,
for example,
you have a data set in a H5 file,
HDF5 file and you want to get it out.
Another advantage of the HDF5 file
format is that you can easily read and
write in chunks, so what we're gonna do
here actually is we're gonna write again.
We're gonna use H5write and
we're gonna be writing to the data set, A,
that's inside of our file.
And so what we're gonna be doing is we're
gonna be writing the elements 12, 13, and
14 and we can tell it, While we wanna
write into that data set and we wanna
write it to a specific part of that data
set, so what we can do is give it indices.
So the index file here will give you
indices for each of the dimensions.
So the first dimension we're gonna
say write to the first three rows,
in the first column of this dataset,
these values.
And so if we read the dataset
after we've done that writing,
you can see that in the first three rows
of the first column, you get 12, 13, and
14 just like we wrote there.
You can use a similar index command
to read just the sub-component
of the dataset as well.
So you can pass it an index which
is a list that shows
the different dimensions to read.
For example if you just wanted to read
the first three elements, the first
three rows of the first column you could
pass this same index command to H5 read.
So some notes further resources.
One thing to keep in mind is that HDF5
can be used to optimize reading and
writing from disc in R.
This tutorial here gives a lot more
information about how to use HDF5.
I've borrowed a lot of information for
this lecture from that tutorial.
And the HDF5 group has a lot
of good information in general
in using HDF5 if that's
what you're interested in.